Trait-based approaches for understanding microbial biodiversity and ecosystem functioning

In ecology, biodiversity-ecosystem functioning (BEF) research has seen a shift in perspective from
taxonomy to function in the last two decades, with successful application of trait-based approaches.
This shift offers opportunities for a deeper mechanistic understanding of the role of biodiversity
in maintaining multiple ecosystem processes and services. In this paper, we highlight studies that
have focused on BEF of microbial communities with an emphasis on integrating trait-based approaches
to microbial ecology. In doing so, we explore some of the inherent challenges and opportunities of
understanding BEF using microbial systems. For example, microbial biologists characterize
communities using gene phylogenies that are often unable to resolve functional traits. Additionally,
experimental designs of existing microbial BEF studies are often inadequate to unravel BEF
relationships. We argue that combining eco-physiological studies with contemporary molecular tools
in a trait-based framework can reinforce our ability to link microbial diversity to ecosystem
processes. We conclude that such trait-based approaches are a promising framework to increase the
understanding of microbial BEF relationships and thus generating systematic principles in microbial
ecology and more generally ecology.



Linking biodiversity and ecosystems: towards a unifying ecological theory

Community ecology and ecosystem ecology provide two perspectives on complex ecological systems that
have largely complementary strengths and weaknesses. Merging the two perspectives is necessary both
to ensure continued scientific progress and to provide society with the scientific means to face
growing environmental challenges. Recent research on biodiversity and ecosystem functioning has
contributed to this goal in several ways. By addressing a new question of high relevance for both
science and society, by challenging existing paradigms, by tightly linking theory and experiments,
by building scientific consensus beyond differences in opinion, by integrating fragmented
disciplines and research fields, by connecting itself to other disciplines and management issues, it
has helped transform ecology not only in content, but also in form. Creating a genuine evolutionary
ecosystem ecology that links the evolution of species traits at the individual level, the dynamics
of species interactions, and the overall functioning of ecosystems would give new impetus to this
much-needed process of unification across ecological disciplines. Recent community evolution models
are a promising step in that direction.



A review of malaria transmission dynamics in forest ecosystems

Malaria continues to be a major health problem in more than 100 endemic countries located primarily
in tropical and sub-tropical regions around the world. Malaria transmission is a dynamic process and
involves many interlinked factors, from uncontrollable natural environmental conditions to man-made
disturbances to nature. Almost half of the population at risk of malaria lives in forest areas.
Forests are hot beds of malaria transmission as they provide conditions such as vegetation cover,
temperature, rainfall and humidity conditions that are conducive to distribution and survival of
malaria vectors. Forests often lack infrastructure and harbor tribes with distinct genetic traits,
socio-cultural beliefs and practices that greatly influence malaria transmission dynamics. Here we
summarize the various topographical, entomological, parasitological, human ecological and socio-
economic factors, which are crucial and shape malaria transmission in forested areas. An in-depth
understanding and synthesis of the intricate relationship of these parameters in achieving better
malaria control in various types of forest ecosystems is emphasized.



High-resolution deep sequencing reveals biodiversity, population structure, and persistence of HIV-1 quasispecies within host ecosystems

Background Deep sequencing provides the basis for analysis of biodiversity of taxonomically similar
organisms in an environment. While extensively applied to microbiome studies, population genetics
studies of viruses are limited. To define the scope of HIV-1 population biodiversity within infected
individuals, a suite of phylogenetic and population genetic algorithms was applied to HIV-1 envelope
hypervariable domain 3 (Env V3) within peripheral blood mononuclear cells from a group of
perinatally HIV-1 subtype B infected, therapy-na√Øve children. Results Biodiversity of HIV-1 Env V3
quasispecies ranged from about 70 to 270 unique sequence clusters across individuals. Viral
population structure was organized into a limited number of clusters that included the dominant
variants combined with multiple clusters of low frequency variants. Next generation viral
quasispecies evolved from low frequency variants at earlier time points through multiple non-
synonymous changes in lineages within the evolutionary landscape. Minor V3 variants detected as long
as four years after infection co-localized in phylogenetic reconstructions with early transmitting
viruses or with subsequent plasma virus circulating two years later. Conclusions Deep sequencing
defines HIV-1 population complexity and structure, reveals the ebb and flow of dominant and rare
viral variants in the host ecosystem, and identifies an evolutionary record of low-frequency cell-
associated viral V3 variants that persist for years. Bioinformatics pipeline developed for HIV-1 can
be applied for biodiversity studies of virome populations in human, animal, or plant ecosystems.



Spatiotemporal modulation of biodiversity in a synthetic chemical-mediated ecosystem

Biodiversity, or the relative abundance of species, measures the persistence of an ecosystem. To
better understand its modulation, we analyzed the spatial and temporal dynamics of a synthetic,
chemical-mediated ecosystem that consisted of two engineered Escherichia coli populations. Depending
on the specific experimental conditions implemented, the dominant interaction between the two
populations could be competition for nutrients or predation due to engineered communication. While
the two types of interactions resulted in different spatial patterns, they demonstrated a common
trend in terms of the modulation of biodiversity. Specifically, biodiversity decreased with
increasing cellular motility if the segregation distance between the two populations was comparable
to the length scale of the chemical-mediated interaction. Otherwise, biodiversity was insensitive to
cellular motility. Our results suggested a simple criterion for predicting the modulation of
biodiversity by habitat partitioning and cellular motility in chemical-mediated ecosystems.



