Reef Fishes in Biodiversity Hotspots Are at Greatest Risk from Loss of Coral Species

Coral reef ecosystems are under a variety of threats from global change and anthropogenic
disturbances that are reducing the number and type of coral species on reefs. Coral reefs support
upwards of one third of all marine species of fish, so the loss of coral habitat may have
substantial consequences to local fish diversity. We posit that the effects of habitat degradation
will be most severe in coral regions with highest biodiversity of fishes due to greater
specialization by fishes for particular coral habitats. Our novel approach to this important but
untested hypothesis was to conduct the same field experiment at three geographic locations across
the Indo-Pacific biodiversity gradient (Papua New Guinea; Great Barrier Reef, Australia; French
Polynesia). Specifically, we experimentally explored whether the response of local fish communities
to identical changes in diversity of habitat-providing corals was independent of the size of the
regional species pool of fishes. We found that the proportional reduction (sensitivity) in fish
biodiversity to loss of coral diversity was greater for regions with larger background species
pools, reflecting variation in the degree of habitat specialization of fishes across the Indo-
Pacific diversity gradient. This result implies that habitat-associated fish in diversity hotspots
are at greater risk of local extinction to a given loss of habitat diversity compared to regions
with lower species richness. This mechanism, related to the positive relationship between habitat
specialization and regional biodiversity, and the elevated extinction risk this poses for
biodiversity hotspots, may apply to species in other types of ecosystems.



A New Freshwater Biodiversity Indicator Based on Fish Community Assemblages

Biodiversity has reached a critical state. In this context, stakeholders need indicators that both
provide a synthetic view of the state of biodiversity and can be used as communication tools. Using
river fishes as model, we developed community indicators that aim at integrating various components
of biodiversity including interactions between species and ultimately the processes influencing
ecosystem functions. We developed indices at the species level based on (i) the concept of
specialization directly linked to the niche theory and (ii) the concept of originality measuring the
overall degree of differences between a species and all other species in the same clade. Five major
types of originality indices, based on phylogeny, habitat-linked and diet-linked morphology, life
history traits, and ecological niche were analyzed. In a second step, we tested the relationship
between all biodiversity indices and land use as a proxy of human pressures. Fish communities showed
no significant temporal trend for most of these indices, but both originality indices based on diet-
and habitat- linked morphology showed a significant increase through time. From a spatial point of
view, all indices clearly singled out Corsica Island as having higher average originality and
specialization. Finally, we observed that the originality index based on niche traits might be used
as an informative biodiversity indicator because we showed it is sensitive to different land use
classes along a landscape artificialization gradient. Moreover, its response remained unchanged over
two other land use classifications at the global scale and also at the regional scale.



The Biodiversity of the Mediterranean Sea: Estimates, Patterns, and Threats

The Mediterranean Sea is a marine biodiversity hot spot. Here we combined an extensive literature
analysis with expert opinions to update publicly available estimates of major taxa in this marine
ecosystem and to revise and update several species lists. We also assessed overall spatial and
temporal patterns of species diversity and identified major changes and threats. Our results listed
approximately 17,000 marine species occurring in the Mediterranean Sea. However, our estimates of
marine diversity are still incomplete as yetâ€”undescribed species will be added in the future.
Diversity for microbes is substantially underestimated, and the deep-sea areas and portions of the
southern and eastern region are still poorly known. In addition, the invasion of alien species is a
crucial factor that will continue to change the biodiversity of the Mediterranean, mainly in its
eastern basin that can spread rapidly northwards and westwards due to the warming of the
Mediterranean Sea. Spatial patterns showed a general decrease in biodiversity from northwestern to
southeastern regions following a gradient of production, with some exceptions and caution due to
gaps in our knowledge of the biota along the southern and eastern rims. Biodiversity was also
generally higher in coastal areas and continental shelves, and decreases with depth. Temporal trends
indicated that overexploitation and habitat loss have been the main human drivers of historical
changes in biodiversity. At present, habitat loss and degradation, followed by fishing impacts,
pollution, climate change, eutrophication, and the establishment of alien species are the most
important threats and affect the greatest number of taxonomic groups. All these impacts are expected
to grow in importance in the future, especially climate change and habitat degradation. The spatial
identification of hot spots highlighted the ecological importance of most of the western
Mediterranean shelves (and in particular, the Strait of Gibraltar and the adjacent Alboran Sea),
western African coast, the Adriatic, and the Aegean Sea, which show high concentrations of
endangered, threatened, or vulnerable species. The Levantine Basin, severely impacted by the
invasion of species, is endangered as well. This abstract has been translated to other languages
(File S1).



Biodiversity inventories and conservation of the marine fishes of Bootless Bay, Papua New Guinea

Background The effective management and conservation of biodiversity is predicated on clearly
defined conservation targets. Species number is frequently used as a metric for conservation
prioritization and monitoring changes in ecosystem health. We conducted a series of synoptic surveys
focusing on the fishes of the Bootless Bay region of Papua New Guinea to generate a checklist of
fishes of the region. Bootless Bay lies directly south of Port Moresby, the capital of Papua New
Guinea, and experiences the highest human population density of any marine area in the country. Our
checklist will set a baseline against which future environmental changes can be tracked. Results We
generated a checklist of 488 fish species in 72 families found in Bootless Bay during a two-week
sampling effort. Using incident-based methods of species estimation, we extrapolate there to be
approximately 940 fish species in Bootless Bay, one of the lowest reported numbers in Papua New
Guinea. Conclusions Our data suggest that the Bootless Bay ecosystem of Papua New Guinea, while
diverse in absolute terms, has lower fish biodiversity compared to other shallow marine areas within
the country. These differences in faunal diversity are most likely a combination of unequal sampling
effort as well as biophysical factors within Bootless Bay compounded by historical and/or
contemporary anthropogenic disturbances.



Revealing the Appetite of the Marine Aquarium Fish Trade: The Volume and Biodiversity of Fish Imported into the United States

The aquarium trade and other wildlife consumers are at a crossroads forced by threats from global
climate change and other anthropogenic stressors that have weakened coastal ecosystems. While the
wildlife trade may put additional stress on coral reefs, it brings income into impoverished parts of
the world and may stimulate interest in marine conservation. To better understand the influence of
the trade, we must first be able to quantify coral reef fauna moving through it. Herein, we discuss
the lack of a data system for monitoring the wildlife aquarium trade and analyze problems that arise
when trying to monitor the trade using a system not specifically designed for this purpose. To do
this, we examined an entire year of import records of marine tropical fish entering the United
States in detail, and discuss the relationship between trade volume, biodiversity and introduction
of non-native marine fishes. Our analyses showed that biodiversity levels are higher than previous
estimates. Additionally, more than half of government importation forms have numerical or other
reporting discrepancies resulting in the overestimation of trade volumes by 27%. While some commonly
imported species have been introduced into the coastal waters of the USA (as expected), we also
found that some uncommon species in the trade have also been introduced. This is the first study of
aquarium trade imports to compare commercial invoices to government forms and provides a means to,
routinely and in real time, examine the biodiversity of the trade in coral reef wildlife species.



