Functionalized carbon nanotubes: biomedical applications

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are emerging as novel nanomaterials for various biomedical applications.
CNTs can be used to deliver a variety of therapeutic agents, including biomolecules, to the target
disease sites. In addition, their unparalleled optical and electrical properties make them excellent
candidates for bioimaging and other biomedical applications. However, the high cytotoxicity of CNTs
limits their use in humans and many biological systems. The biocompatibility and low cytotoxicity of
CNTs are attributed to size, dose, duration, testing systems, and surface functionalization. The
functionalization of CNTs improves their solubility and biocompatibility and alters their cellular
interaction pathways, resulting in much-reduced cytotoxic effects. Functionalized CNTs are promising
novel materials for a variety of biomedical applications. These potential applications are
particularly enhanced by their ability to penetrate biological membranes with relatively low
cytotoxicity. This review is directed towards the overview of CNTs and their functionalization for
biomedical applications with minimal cytotoxicity.



The role of soil microbes in the global carbon cycle: tracking the below-ground microbial processing of plant-derived carbon for manipulating carbon dynamics in agricultural systems

It is well known that atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide (CO2) (and other greenhouse
gases) have increased markedly as a result of human activity since the industrial revolution. It is
perhaps less appreciated that natural and managed soils are an important source and sink for
atmospheric CO2 and that, primarily as a result of the activities of soil microorganisms, there is a
soil-derived respiratory flux of CO2 to the atmosphere that overshadows by tenfold the annual CO2
flux from fossil fuel emissions. Therefore small changes in the soil carbon cycle could have large
impacts on atmospheric CO2 concentrations. Here we discuss the role of soil microbes in the global
carbon cycle and review the main methods that have been used to identify the microorganisms
responsible for the processing of plant photosynthetic carbon inputs to soil. We discuss whether
application of these techniques can provide the information required to underpin the management of
agro-ecosystems for carbon sequestration and increased agricultural sustainability. We conclude
that, although crucial in enabling the identification of plant-derived carbon-utilising microbes,
current technologies lack the high-throughput ability to quantitatively apportion carbon use by
phylogentic groups and its use efficiency and destination within the microbial metabolome. It is
this information that is required to inform rational manipulation of the plantâ€“soil system to favour
organisms or physiologies most important for promoting soil carbon storage in agricultural soil.



Comparison of anti-angiogenic properties of pristine carbon nanoparticles

Angiogenesis is vital for tumour formation, development and metastasis. Recent reports show that
carbon nanomaterials inhibit various angiogenic signalling pathways and, therefore, can be
potentially used in anti-angiogenic therapy. In the present study, we compared the effect of
different carbon nanomaterials on blood vessel development. Diamond nanoparticles, graphite
nanoparticles, graphene nanosheets, multi-wall nanotubes and C60 fullerenes were evaluated for their
angiogenic activities using the in ovo chick embryo chorioallantoic membrane model. Diamond
nanoparticles and multi-wall nanotubes showed the greatest anti-angiogenic properties.
Interestingly, fullerene exhibited the opposite effect, increasing blood vessel development, while
graphite nanoparticles and graphene had no effect. Subsequently, protein levels of pro-angiogenic
growth factor receptors were analysed, showing that diamond nanoparticles decreased the expression
of vascular endothelial growth factor receptor. These results provide new insights into the
biological activity of carbon nanomaterials and emphasise the potential use of multi-wall nanotubes
and diamond nanoparticles in anti-angiogenic tumour therapy.



Plasma-Assisted Synthesis of Carbon Nanotubes

The application of plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) in the production and
modification of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) will be reviewed. The challenges of PECVD methods to grow
CNTs include low temperature synthesis, ion bombardment effects and directional growth of CNT within
the plasma sheath. New strategies have been developed for low temperature synthesis of single-walled
CNTs based the understanding of plasma chemistry and modelling. The modification of CNT surface
properties and synthesis of CNT hybrid materials are possible with the utilization of plasma.



A new era of cancer treatment: carbon nanotubes as drug delivery tools

Cancer is a generic term that encompasses a group of diseases characterized by an uncontrolled
proliferation of cells. There are over 200 different types of cancer, each of which gains its
nomenclature according to the type of tissue the cell originates in. Many patients who succumb to
cancer do not die as a result of the primary tumor, but because of the systemic effects of
metastases on other regions away from the original site. One of the aims of cancer therapy is to
prevent the metastatic process as early as possible. There are currently many therapies in clinical
use, and recent advances in biotechnology lend credence to the potential of nanotechnology in the
fight against cancer. Nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), quantum dots, and dendrimers
have unique properties that can be exploited for diagnostic purposes, thermal ablation, and drug
delivery in cancer. CNTs are tubular materials with nanometer-sized diameters and axial symmetry,
giving them unique properties that can be exploited in the diagnosis and treatment of cancer. In
addition, CNTs have the potential to deliver drugs directly to targeted cells and tissues. Alongside
the rapid advances in the development of nanotechnology-based materials, elucidating the toxicity of
nanoparticles is also imperative. Hence, in this review, we seek to explore the biomedical
applications of CNTs, with particular emphasis on their use as therapeutic platforms in oncology.



