Invasive Species and Biodiversity Crises: Testing the Link in the Late Devonian

During the Late Devonian Biodiversity Crisis, the primary driver of biodiversity decline was the
dramatic reduction in speciation rates, not elevated extinction rates; however, the causes of
speciation decline have been previously unstudied. Speciation, the formation of new species from
ancestral populations, occurs by two primary allopatric mechanisms: vicariance, where the ancestral
population is passively divided into two large subpopulations that later diverge and form two
daughter species, and dispersal, in which a small subset of the ancestral population actively
migrates then diverges to form a new species. Studies of modern and fossil clades typically document
speciation by vicariance in much higher frequencies than speciation by dispersal. To assess the
mechanism behind Late Devonian speciation reduction, speciation rates were calculated within
stratigraphically constrained species-level phylogenetic hypotheses for three representative clades
and mode of speciation at cladogenetic events was assessed across four clades in three phyla:
Arthropoda, Brachiopoda, and Mollusca. In all cases, Devonian taxa exhibited a congruent reduction
in speciation rate between the Middle Devonian pre-crisis interval and the Late Devonian crisis
interval. Furthermore, speciation via vicariance is almost entirely absent during the crisis
interval; most episodes of speciation during this time were due to dispersal. The shutdown of
speciation by vicariance during this interval was related to widespread interbasinal species
invasions. The lack of Late Devonian vicariance is diametrically opposed to the pattern observed in
other geologic intervals, which suggests the loss of vicariant speciation attributable to species
invasions during the Late Devonian was a causal factor in the biodiversity crisis. Similarly, modern
ecosystems, in which invasive species are rampant, may be expected to exhibit similar shutdown of
speciation by vicariance as an outcome of the modern biodiversity crisis.



Species richness and macronutrient content of wawo worms (Polychaeta, Annelida) from Ambonese waters, Maluku, Indonesia

The aims of this research were to: (1) investigate the species richness of wawo worms, and to (2)
analyze macronutrient content of the worms. Wawo worms were sampled using a fishing net on March
18th-19th, 2014, from Ambonese waters, Maluku. As many as 26 wawo species belonging to 5 families
were identified. Palola sp. was identified as the most abundant species of wawo, followed by
Lysidice oele, Horst 1905, Eunice spp. and nereidids. Results of the proximate analysis reveal that
female epitokes of Palola sp. contain 10.78 % ash, 10.71 % moisture, 11.67 % crude fat, 54.72 %
crude protein and 12.12 % carbohydrate.


Maximizing species conservation in continental Ecuador: a case of systematic conservation planning for biodiverse regions

Ecuador has the largest number of species by area worldwide, but also a low representation of
species within its protected areas. Here, we applied systematic conservation planning to identify
potential areas for conservation in continental Ecuador, with the aim of increasing the
representation of terrestrial species diversity in the protected area network. We selected 809
terrestrial species (amphibians, birds, mammals, and plants), for which distributions were estimated
via species distribution models (SDMs), using Maxent. For each species we established conservation
goals based on conservation priorities, and estimated new potential protected areas using Marxan
conservation planning software. For each selected area, we determined their conservation priority
and feasibility of establishment, two important aspects in the decision-making processes. We found
that according to our conservation goals, the current protected area network contains large
conservation gaps. Potential areas for conservation almost double the surface area of currently
protected areas. Most of the newly proposed areas are located in the Coast, a region with large
conservation gaps and irreversible changes in land use. The most feasible areas for conservation
were found in the Amazon and Andes regions, which encompass more undisturbed habitats, and already
harbor most of the current reserves. Our study allows defining a viable strategy for preserving
Ecuador's biodiversity, by combining SDMs, GIS-based decision-support software, and priority and
feasibility assessments of the selected areas. This approach is useful for complementing protected
area networks in countries with great biodiversity, insufficient biological information, and limited
resources for conservation.



Biodiversity loss decreases parasite diversity: theory and patterns

Past models have suggested hostâ€“parasite coextinction could lead to linear, or concave down
relationships between free-living species richness and parasite richness. I explored several models
for the relationship between parasite richness and biodiversity loss. Life cycle complexity, low
generality of parasites and sensitivity of hosts reduced the robustness of parasite species to the
loss of free-living species diversity. Food-web complexity and the ordering of extinctions altered
these relationships in unpredictable ways. Each disassembly of a food web resulted in a unique
relationship between parasite richness and the richness of free-living species, because the
extinction trajectory of parasites was sensitive to the order of extinctions of free-living species.
However, the average of many disassemblies tended to approximate an analytical model. Parasites of
specialist hosts and hosts higher on food chains were more likely to go extinct in food-web models.
Furthermore, correlated extinctions between hosts and parasites (e.g. if parasites share a host with
a specialist predator) led to steeper declines in parasite richness with biodiversity loss. In
empirical food webs with random removals of free-living species, the relationship between free-
living species richness and parasite richness was, on average, quasi-linear, suggesting biodiversity
loss reduces parasite diversity more than previously thought.



Fatal attraction: rare species in the spotlight

The exploitation of rare and endangered species can end in the species's extinction because the
increased value people associate with rarity increases the economic incentive to exploit the last
individuals, creating a positive feedback loop. This recently proposed concept, called the
anthropogenic Allee effect (AAE), relies on the assumption that people do value rarity, but this
remains to be established. Moreover, it also remains to be determined whether attraction to rarity
is a trait confined to a minority of hobbyists (e.g. wildlife collectors, exotic pet owners) or
characteristic of the general public. We estimated how much the general public valued rare species
compared with common ones, using five different metrics related to personal investment: time spent,
physical effort, unpleasantness, economic investment and risk. We surveyed the visitors of a zoo. To
see the rare species, the visitors to the zoo invested more time in searching and contemplation,
they were ready to expend more physical effort, they tolerated more unpleasant conditions, they were
willing to pay more and, finally, they risked more to obtain (steal) a rare species. Our results
provide substantial evidence of how the general public places more value on rare species, compared
with common species. This confirms the AAE as an actual process, which in addition concerns a large
part of the population. This has important consequences for the conservation of species that are
rare now, or that could become so in the future.



